api/docs/v2/new_labware.rst, before:

.. _new-labware:

########
Labware
########


When writing a protocol, you must inform the Protocol API about the labware you will be placing on the OT-2's deck.

When you load labware, you specify the name of the labware (e.g. ``'corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat'``), and the slot on the OT-2's deck in which it will be placed (e.g. ``'2'``). The first place to look for the names of labware should always be the `Opentrons Labware Library <https://labware.opentrons.com>`_, where Opentrons maintains a database of labware, their names in the API, what they look like, manufacturer part numbers, and more. In this example, we’ll use ``'corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat'`` (`an ANSI standard 96-well plate <https://labware.opentrons.com/corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat>`_) and ``'opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul'`` (`the Opentrons standard 300 µL tiprack <https://labware.opentrons.com/opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul>`_).

In the example given in the :ref:`overview-section-v2` section, we loaded labware like this:

.. code-block:: python

    plate = protocol.load_labware('corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat', '2')
    tiprack = protocol.load_labware('opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul', '1')


which informed the protocol context that the deck contains a 300 µL tiprack in slot 1 and a 96 well plate in slot 2.

A third optional argument can be used to give the labware a nickname to be displayed in the Opentrons App.

.. code-block:: python

    plate = protocol.load_labware('corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat',
                                  slot='2',
                                  label='any-name-you-want')

Labware is loaded into a protocol using :py:meth:`.ProtocolContext.load_labware`, which returns
:py:class:`opentrons.protocol_api.labware.Labware` object.

***************
Finding Labware
***************

Default Labware
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The OT-2 has a set of labware well-supported by Opentrons defined internally. This set of labware is always available to protocols. This labware can be found on the `Opentrons Labware Library <https://labware.opentrons.com>`_. You can copy the load names that should be passed to ``protocol.load_labware`` statements to get the correct definitions.


.. _v2-custom-labware:

Custom Labware
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you have a piece of labware that is not in the Labware Library, you can create your own definition using the `Opentrons Labware Creator <https://labware.opentrons.com/create/>`_. Before using the Labware Creator, you should read the introduction article `here <https://support.opentrons.com/en/articles/3136504-creating-custom-labware-definitions>`_.

Once you have created your labware and saved it as a ``.json`` file, you can add it to the Opentrons App by clicking "More" and then "Labware". Once you have added your labware to the Opentrons App, it will be available to all Python Protocol API version 2 protocols uploaded to your robot through that Opentrons App. If other people will be using this custom labware definition, they must also add it to their Opentrons App. You can find a support article about this custom labware process `here <https://support.opentrons.com/en/articles/3136506-using-labware-in-your-protocols>`_.


.. _new-well-access:

**************************
Accessing Wells in Labware
**************************

Well Ordering
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When writing a protocol, you will need to select which wells to
transfer liquids to and from.

Rows of wells (see image below) on a labware are typically labeled with capital letters starting with ``'A'``;
for instance, an 8x12 96 well plate will have rows ``'A'`` through ``'H'``.

Columns of wells (see image below) on a labware are typically labeled with numerical indices starting with ``'1'``;
for instance, an 8x12 96 well plate will have columns ``'1'`` through ``'12'``.

For all well accessing functions, the starting well will always be at the top left corner of the labware.
The ending well will be in the bottom right, see the diagram below for further explanation.

.. image:: ../img/well_iteration/Well_Iteration.png

.. code-block:: python

    '''
    Examples in this section expect the following
    '''
    metadata = {'apiLevel': '2.2'}

    def run(protocol):

        plate = protocol.load_labware('corning_24_wellplate_3.4ml_flat', slot='1')


.. versionadded:: 2.0


Accessor Methods
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are many different ways to access wells inside labware. Different methods are useful in different contexts. The table below lists out the methods available to access wells and their differences.

+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|   Method Name                       |         Returns                                                                                                   |
+=====================================+===================================================================================================================+
| :py:meth:`.Labware.wells`           | List of all wells, i.e. ``[labware:A1, labware:B1, labware:C1...]``                                               |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :py:meth:`.Labware.rows`            | List of a list ordered by row, i.e ``[[labware:A1, labware:A2...], [labware:B1, labware:B2..]]``                  |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :py:meth:`.Labware.columns`         | List of a list ordered by column, i.e. ``[[labware:A1, labware:B1..], [labware:A2, labware:B2..]]``               |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :py:meth:`.Labware.wells_by_name`   | Dictionary with well names as keys, i.e. ``{'A1': labware:A1, 'B1': labware:B1}``                                 |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :py:meth:`.Labware.rows_by_name`    | Dictionary with row names as keys, i.e. ``{'A': [labware:A1, labware:A2..], 'B': [labware:B1, labware:B2]}``      |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :py:meth:`.Labware.columns_by_name` | Dictionary with column names as keys, i.e. ``{'1': [labware:A1, labware:B1..], '2': [labware:A2, labware:B2..]}`` |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Accessing Individual Wells
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Dictionary Access
-----------------

Once a labware is loaded into your protocol, you can easily access the many
wells within it by using dictionary indexing. If a well does not exist in this labware,
you will receive a ``KeyError``. This is equivalent to using the return value of
:py:meth:`.Labware.wells_by_name`:

.. code-block:: python

    a1 = plate['A1']
    d6 = plate.wells_by_name()['D6']

.. versionadded:: 2.0

List Access From ``wells``
--------------------------

Wells can be referenced by their name, as demonstrated above.
However, they can also be referenced with zero-indexing, with the first well in
a labware being at position 0.

.. code-block:: python

    plate.wells()[0]   # well A1
    plate.wells()[23]  # well D6

.. tip::

    You may find well names (e.g. ``"B3"``) to be easier to reason with,
    especially with irregular labware (e.g.
    ``opentrons_10_tuberack_falcon_4x50ml_6x15ml_conical``
    (`Labware Library <https://labware.opentrons.com/opentrons_10_tuberack_falcon_4x50ml_6x15ml_conical>`_).
    Whichever well access method you use, your protocol will be most maintainable if you use only one access method consistently.

.. versionadded:: 2.0

Accessing Groups of Wells
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When describing a liquid transfer, you can point to groups of wells for the
liquid's source and/or destination. Or, you can get a group of wells and loop
(or iterate) through them.

You can access a specific row or column of wells by using the
:py:meth:`.Labware.rows_by_name` and :py:meth:`.Labware.columns_by_name` methods
on a labware. These methods both return a dictionary with the row or column name as the keys:

.. code-block:: python

    row_dict = plate.rows_by_name()['A']
    row_list = plate.rows()[0] # equivalent to the line above
    column_dict = plate.columns_by_name()['1']
    column_list = plate.columns()[0] # equivalent to the line above

    print('Column "1" has', len(column_dict), 'wells')
    print('Row "A" has', len(row_dict), 'wells')

will print out...

.. code-block:: python

    Column "1" has 4 wells
    Row "A" has 6 wells

Since these methods return either lists or dictionaries, you can iterate through them as you would regular Python data structures.

For example, to access the individual wells of row ``'A'`` in a well plate, you can do:

.. code-block:: python

    for well in plate.rows()[0]:
        print(well)

or,

.. code-block:: python

    for well_obj in plate.rows_by_name()['A'].values():
        print(well_obj)

and it will return the individual well objects in row A.

.. versionadded:: 2.0


.. _v2-location-within-wells:

********************************
Specifying Position Within Wells
********************************

The functions listed above (in the :ref:`new-well-access` section) return objects
(or lists, lists of lists, dictionaries, or dictionaries of lists of objects)
representing wells. These are :py:class:`opentrons.protocol_api.labware.Well`
objects.
:py:class:`.Well` objects have some useful methods on them, which allow
you to more closely specify the location to which the OT-2 should move *inside*
a given well.

Each of these methods returns an object called a :py:class:`opentrons.types.Location`,
which encapsulates a position in deck coordinates (see :ref:`protocol-api-deck-coords`)
and a well with which it is associated. This lets you further manipulate the
positions returned by these methods. All :py:class:`.InstrumentContext` methods that
involve positions accept these :py:class:`.Location` objects.


Position Modifiers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Top
---

The method :py:meth:`.Well.top` returns a position at the top center of the well. This
is a good position to use for :ref:`new-blow-out` or any other operation where you
don't want to be contacting the liquid. In addition, :py:meth:`.Well.top` takes an
optional argument ``z``, which is a distance in mm to move relative to the top
vertically (positive numbers move up, and negative numbers move down):

.. code-block:: python

   plate['A1'].top()     # This is the top center of the well
   plate['A1'].top(z=1)  # This is 1mm above the top center of the well
   plate['A1'].top(z=-1) # This is 1mm below the top center of the well

.. versionadded:: 2.0

Bottom
------

The method :py:meth:`.Well.bottom` returns a position at the bottom center of the
well. This is a good position to start when considering where to aspirate,
or any other operation where you want to be contacting the liquid. In addition,
:py:meth:`.Well.bottom` takes an optional argument ``z``, which is a distance in mm
to move relative to the bottom vertically (positive numbers move up, and negative
numbers move down):

.. code-block:: python

   plate['A1'].bottom()     # This is the bottom center of the well
   plate['A1'].bottom(z=1)  # This is 1mm above the bottom center of the well
   plate['A1'].bottom(z=-1) # This is 1mm below the bottom center of the well.
                            # this may be dangerous!


.. warning::

    Negative ``z`` arguments to :py:meth:`.Well.bottom` may cause the tip to
    collide with the bottom of the well. The OT-2 has no sensors to detect this,
    and if it happens, the pipette that collided will be too high in z until the next time it picks up a tip.


.. note::

   If you are using this to change the position at which the robot does
   :ref:`new-aspirate` or :ref:`new-dispense` throughout the protocol, consider
   setting the default aspirate or dispense offset with
   :py:obj:`.InstrumentContext.well_bottom_clearance`
   (see :ref:`new-default-op-positions`).

.. versionadded:: 2.0

Center
------

The method :py:meth:`.Well.center` returns a position centered in the well both
vertically and horizontally. This can be a good place to start for precise
control of positions within the well for unusual or custom labware.

.. code-block:: python

   plate['A1'].center() # This is the vertical and horizontal center of the well

.. versionadded:: 2.0

Manipulating Positions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The objects returned by the position modifier functions are all instances of
:py:class:`opentrons.types.Location`, which are
`named tuples <https://docs.python.org/3/library/collections.html#collections.namedtuple>`_
representing the combination of a point in space (another named tuple) and
a reference to the associated :py:class:`.Well` (or :py:class:`.Labware`, or
slot name, depending on context).

To further change positions, you can use :py:meth:`.Location.move`, which
lets you move the Location. This function takes a single argument, ``point``,
which should be a :py:class:`opentrons.types.Point`. This is a named tuple
with elements ``x``, ``y``, and ``z``, representing a 3 dimensional point.

To move a location, you create a :py:class:`.types.Point` representing a
3d offset and give it to :py:meth:`.Location.move`:

.. code-block:: python

   from opentrons import types

   metadata = {'apiLevel': '2.2'}

   def run(protocol):
        plate = protocol.load_labware(
           'corning_24_wellplate_3.4ml_flat', slot='1')
        plate['A1'].center().move(
           types.Point(x=1, y=1, z=1)) # 1mm up, to the right, and towards the
                                       # back of the robot

.. versionadded:: 2.0

Commit message:

docs(api): correct .move() example (#6002)
Fixes #5806.

api/docs/v2/new_labware.rst, after:

.. _new-labware:

########
Labware
########


When writing a protocol, you must inform the Protocol API about the labware you will be placing on the OT-2's deck.

When you load labware, you specify the name of the labware (e.g. ``'corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat'``), and the slot on the OT-2's deck in which it will be placed (e.g. ``'2'``). The first place to look for the names of labware should always be the `Opentrons Labware Library <https://labware.opentrons.com>`_, where Opentrons maintains a database of labware, their names in the API, what they look like, manufacturer part numbers, and more. In this example, we’ll use ``'corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat'`` (`an ANSI standard 96-well plate <https://labware.opentrons.com/corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat>`_) and ``'opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul'`` (`the Opentrons standard 300 µL tiprack <https://labware.opentrons.com/opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul>`_).

In the example given in the :ref:`overview-section-v2` section, we loaded labware like this:

.. code-block:: python

    plate = protocol.load_labware('corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat', '2')
    tiprack = protocol.load_labware('opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul', '1')


which informed the protocol context that the deck contains a 300 µL tiprack in slot 1 and a 96 well plate in slot 2.

A third optional argument can be used to give the labware a nickname to be displayed in the Opentrons App.

.. code-block:: python

    plate = protocol.load_labware('corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat',
                                  slot='2',
                                  label='any-name-you-want')

Labware is loaded into a protocol using :py:meth:`.ProtocolContext.load_labware`, which returns
:py:class:`opentrons.protocol_api.labware.Labware` object.

***************
Finding Labware
***************

Default Labware
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The OT-2 has a set of labware well-supported by Opentrons defined internally. This set of labware is always available to protocols. This labware can be found on the `Opentrons Labware Library <https://labware.opentrons.com>`_. You can copy the load names that should be passed to ``protocol.load_labware`` statements to get the correct definitions.


.. _v2-custom-labware:

Custom Labware
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you have a piece of labware that is not in the Labware Library, you can create your own definition using the `Opentrons Labware Creator <https://labware.opentrons.com/create/>`_. Before using the Labware Creator, you should read the introduction article `here <https://support.opentrons.com/en/articles/3136504-creating-custom-labware-definitions>`_.

Once you have created your labware and saved it as a ``.json`` file, you can add it to the Opentrons App by clicking "More" and then "Labware". Once you have added your labware to the Opentrons App, it will be available to all Python Protocol API version 2 protocols uploaded to your robot through that Opentrons App. If other people will be using this custom labware definition, they must also add it to their Opentrons App. You can find a support article about this custom labware process `here <https://support.opentrons.com/en/articles/3136506-using-labware-in-your-protocols>`_.


.. _new-well-access:

**************************
Accessing Wells in Labware
**************************

Well Ordering
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When writing a protocol, you will need to select which wells to
transfer liquids to and from.

Rows of wells (see image below) on a labware are typically labeled with capital letters starting with ``'A'``;
for instance, an 8x12 96 well plate will have rows ``'A'`` through ``'H'``.

Columns of wells (see image below) on a labware are typically labeled with numerical indices starting with ``'1'``;
for instance, an 8x12 96 well plate will have columns ``'1'`` through ``'12'``.

For all well accessing functions, the starting well will always be at the top left corner of the labware.
The ending well will be in the bottom right, see the diagram below for further explanation.

.. image:: ../img/well_iteration/Well_Iteration.png

.. code-block:: python

    '''
    Examples in this section expect the following
    '''
    metadata = {'apiLevel': '2.2'}

    def run(protocol):

        plate = protocol.load_labware('corning_24_wellplate_3.4ml_flat', slot='1')


.. versionadded:: 2.0


Accessor Methods
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are many different ways to access wells inside labware. Different methods are useful in different contexts. The table below lists out the methods available to access wells and their differences.

+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|   Method Name                       |         Returns                                                                                                   |
+=====================================+===================================================================================================================+
| :py:meth:`.Labware.wells`           | List of all wells, i.e. ``[labware:A1, labware:B1, labware:C1...]``                                               |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :py:meth:`.Labware.rows`            | List of a list ordered by row, i.e ``[[labware:A1, labware:A2...], [labware:B1, labware:B2..]]``                  |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :py:meth:`.Labware.columns`         | List of a list ordered by column, i.e. ``[[labware:A1, labware:B1..], [labware:A2, labware:B2..]]``               |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :py:meth:`.Labware.wells_by_name`   | Dictionary with well names as keys, i.e. ``{'A1': labware:A1, 'B1': labware:B1}``                                 |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :py:meth:`.Labware.rows_by_name`    | Dictionary with row names as keys, i.e. ``{'A': [labware:A1, labware:A2..], 'B': [labware:B1, labware:B2]}``      |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :py:meth:`.Labware.columns_by_name` | Dictionary with column names as keys, i.e. ``{'1': [labware:A1, labware:B1..], '2': [labware:A2, labware:B2..]}`` |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Accessing Individual Wells
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Dictionary Access
-----------------

Once a labware is loaded into your protocol, you can easily access the many
wells within it by using dictionary indexing. If a well does not exist in this labware,
you will receive a ``KeyError``. This is equivalent to using the return value of
:py:meth:`.Labware.wells_by_name`:

.. code-block:: python

    a1 = plate['A1']
    d6 = plate.wells_by_name()['D6']

.. versionadded:: 2.0

List Access From ``wells``
--------------------------

Wells can be referenced by their name, as demonstrated above.
However, they can also be referenced with zero-indexing, with the first well in
a labware being at position 0.

.. code-block:: python

    plate.wells()[0]   # well A1
    plate.wells()[23]  # well D6

.. tip::

    You may find well names (e.g. ``"B3"``) to be easier to reason with,
    especially with irregular labware (e.g.
    ``opentrons_10_tuberack_falcon_4x50ml_6x15ml_conical``
    (`Labware Library <https://labware.opentrons.com/opentrons_10_tuberack_falcon_4x50ml_6x15ml_conical>`_).
    Whichever well access method you use, your protocol will be most maintainable if you use only one access method consistently.

.. versionadded:: 2.0

Accessing Groups of Wells
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When describing a liquid transfer, you can point to groups of wells for the
liquid's source and/or destination. Or, you can get a group of wells and loop
(or iterate) through them.

You can access a specific row or column of wells by using the
:py:meth:`.Labware.rows_by_name` and :py:meth:`.Labware.columns_by_name` methods
on a labware. These methods both return a dictionary with the row or column name as the keys:

.. code-block:: python

    row_dict = plate.rows_by_name()['A']
    row_list = plate.rows()[0] # equivalent to the line above
    column_dict = plate.columns_by_name()['1']
    column_list = plate.columns()[0] # equivalent to the line above

    print('Column "1" has', len(column_dict), 'wells')
    print('Row "A" has', len(row_dict), 'wells')

will print out...

.. code-block:: python

    Column "1" has 4 wells
    Row "A" has 6 wells

Since these methods return either lists or dictionaries, you can iterate through them as you would regular Python data structures.

For example, to access the individual wells of row ``'A'`` in a well plate, you can do:

.. code-block:: python

    for well in plate.rows()[0]:
        print(well)

or,

.. code-block:: python

    for well_obj in plate.rows_by_name()['A'].values():
        print(well_obj)

and it will return the individual well objects in row A.

.. versionadded:: 2.0


.. _v2-location-within-wells:

********************************
Specifying Position Within Wells
********************************

The functions listed above (in the :ref:`new-well-access` section) return objects
(or lists, lists of lists, dictionaries, or dictionaries of lists of objects)
representing wells. These are :py:class:`opentrons.protocol_api.labware.Well`
objects.
:py:class:`.Well` objects have some useful methods on them, which allow
you to more closely specify the location to which the OT-2 should move *inside*
a given well.

Each of these methods returns an object called a :py:class:`opentrons.types.Location`,
which encapsulates a position in deck coordinates (see :ref:`protocol-api-deck-coords`)
and a well with which it is associated. This lets you further manipulate the
positions returned by these methods. All :py:class:`.InstrumentContext` methods that
involve positions accept these :py:class:`.Location` objects.


Position Modifiers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Top
---

The method :py:meth:`.Well.top` returns a position at the top center of the well. This
is a good position to use for :ref:`new-blow-out` or any other operation where you
don't want to be contacting the liquid. In addition, :py:meth:`.Well.top` takes an
optional argument ``z``, which is a distance in mm to move relative to the top
vertically (positive numbers move up, and negative numbers move down):

.. code-block:: python

   plate['A1'].top()     # This is the top center of the well
   plate['A1'].top(z=1)  # This is 1mm above the top center of the well
   plate['A1'].top(z=-1) # This is 1mm below the top center of the well

.. versionadded:: 2.0

Bottom
------

The method :py:meth:`.Well.bottom` returns a position at the bottom center of the
well. This is a good position to start when considering where to aspirate,
or any other operation where you want to be contacting the liquid. In addition,
:py:meth:`.Well.bottom` takes an optional argument ``z``, which is a distance in mm
to move relative to the bottom vertically (positive numbers move up, and negative
numbers move down):

.. code-block:: python

   plate['A1'].bottom()     # This is the bottom center of the well
   plate['A1'].bottom(z=1)  # This is 1mm above the bottom center of the well
   plate['A1'].bottom(z=-1) # This is 1mm below the bottom center of the well.
                            # this may be dangerous!


.. warning::

    Negative ``z`` arguments to :py:meth:`.Well.bottom` may cause the tip to
    collide with the bottom of the well. The OT-2 has no sensors to detect this,
    and if it happens, the pipette that collided will be too high in z until the next time it picks up a tip.


.. note::

   If you are using this to change the position at which the robot does
   :ref:`new-aspirate` or :ref:`new-dispense` throughout the protocol, consider
   setting the default aspirate or dispense offset with
   :py:obj:`.InstrumentContext.well_bottom_clearance`
   (see :ref:`new-default-op-positions`).

.. versionadded:: 2.0

Center
------

The method :py:meth:`.Well.center` returns a position centered in the well both
vertically and horizontally. This can be a good place to start for precise
control of positions within the well for unusual or custom labware.

.. code-block:: python

   plate['A1'].center() # This is the vertical and horizontal center of the well

.. versionadded:: 2.0

Manipulating Positions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The objects returned by the position modifier functions are all instances of
:py:class:`opentrons.types.Location`, which are
`named tuples <https://docs.python.org/3/library/collections.html#collections.namedtuple>`_
representing the combination of a point in space (another named tuple) and
a reference to the associated :py:class:`.Well` (or :py:class:`.Labware`, or
slot name, depending on context).

To adjust the position within a well, you can use :py:meth:`.Location.move`.
Pass it a :py:class:`opentrons.types.Point` representing a 3-dimensional offset.
It will return a new location, representing the original location with that offset applied.

For example:

.. code-block:: python

   from opentrons import types

   metadata = {'apiLevel': '2.2'}

   def run(protocol):
        plate = protocol.load_labware(
           'corning_24_wellplate_3.4ml_flat', slot='1')

        # Get the center of well A1.
        center_location = plate['A1'].center()

        # Get a location 1 mm right, 1 mm back, and 1 mm up from the center of well A1.
        adjusted_location = center_location.move(types.Point(x=1, y=1, z=1))

        # Move to 1 mm right, 1 mm back, and 1 mm up from the center of well A1.
        pipette.move_to(adjusted_location)

.. versionadded:: 2.0
