api/docs/v2/new_atomic_commands.rst, before:

.. _v2-atomic-commands:

#######################
Building Block Commands
#######################

Building block, or basic, commands are the smallest individual actions that can be completed on an OT-2.
For example, the complex command ``transfer`` (see :ref:`v2-complex-commands`) executes a series of ``pick_up_tip()``, ``aspirate()``, ``dispense()`` and ``drop_tip()`` basic commands.

The examples in this section would be added to the following:

.. code-block:: python

    from opentrons import protocol_api

    metadata = {'apiLevel': '2.0'}

    def run(protocol: protocol_api.ProtocolContext):
        tiprack = protocol.load_labware('corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat', 2)
        plate = protocol.load_labware('opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul', 3)
        pipette = protocol.load_instrument('p300_single_gen2', mount='left')
        # the example code below would go here, inside the run function


This loads a `Corning 96 Well Plate <https://labware.opentrons.com/corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat>`_ in slot 2 and a `Opentrons 300 µL Tiprack <https://labware.opentrons.com/opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul>`_ in slot 3, and uses a P300 Single GEN2 pipette.


**************
Tip Handling
**************

When the OT-2 handle liquids with, it constantly exchanges old, used tips for new ones to prevent cross-contamination between wells. Tip handling uses the functions :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.pick_up_tip`, :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.drop_tip`, and :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.return_tip`.

Pick Up Tip
===========

Before any liquid handling can be done, your pipette must have a tip on it. The command :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.pick_up_tip` will move the pipette over to the specified tip, then press down into it to create a vacuum seal. The below example picks up the tip at location ``'A1'`` of the tiprack previously loaded in slot 3.

.. code-block:: python

   pipette.pick_up_tip(tiprack['A1'])

If you have associated a tiprack with your pipette such as in the :ref:`new-pipette` or :ref:`protocol_api-protocols-and-instruments` sections, then you can simply call

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.pick_up_tip()

This will use the next available tip from the list of tipracks passed in to the ``tip_racks`` argument of :py:meth:`.ProtocolContext.load_instrument`.               

.. versionadded:: 2.0

Drop Tip
========

Once finished with a tip, the pipette will remove the tip when we call :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.drop_tip`. You can specify where to drop the tip by passing in a location. The below example drops the tip back at its original location on the tip rack.
If no location is specified, the OT-2 will drop the tip in the fixed trash in slot 12 of the deck.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.pick_up_tip()
    pipette.drop_tip(tiprack['A1'])  # drop back in A1 of the tiprack
    pipette.pick_up_tip()
    pipette.drop_tip()  # drop in the fixed trash on the deck


.. versionadded:: 2.0

Return Tip
===========

To retun the tip to the original location, you can call :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.return_tip`. The example below will automatically return the tip to ``'A3'`` on the tip rack.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.pick_up_tip(tiprack['A3'])
    pipette.return_tip()


Iterating Through Tips
----------------------

For this section, instead of using the protocol defined above, consider this setup:

.. code-block:: python

    from opentrons import protocol_api

    metadata = {'apiLevel': '2.0'}

    def run(protocol: protocol_api.ProtocolContext):
        plate = protocol.load_labware(
            'corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat', 2)
        tip_rack_1 = protocol.load_labware(
            'opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul', 3)
        tip_rack_2 = protocol.load_labware(
            'opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul', 4)
        pipette = protocol.load_instrument(
            'p300_single_gen2', mount='left', tip_racks=[tip_rack_1, tip_rack_2])

This loads a `Corning 96 Well Plate <https://labware.opentrons.com/corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat>`_ in slot 2 and two `Opentrons 300ul Tiprack <https://labware.opentrons.com/opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul>`_ in slots 3 and 4 respectively, and uses a P300 Single GEN2 pipette.

When a list of tip racks is associated with a pipette in its ``tip_racks`` argument, the pipette will automatically pick up the next unused tip in the list whenever you call :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.pick_up_tip`. The pipette will first use all tips in the first tiprack, then move on to the second, and so on:

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.pick_up_tip()  # picks up tip_rack_1:A1
    pipette.return_tip()
    pipette.pick_up_tip()  # picks up tip_rack_1:A2
    pipette.drop_tip()     # automatically drops in trash

    # use loop to pick up tips tip_rack_1:A3 through tip_rack_2:H12
    tips_left = 94 + 96 # add up the number of tips leftover in both tipracks
    for _ in range(tips_left):
        pipette.pick_up_tip()
        pipette.return_tip()

If you try to :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.pick_up_tip()` again when all the tips have been used, the Protocol API will show you an error:

.. code-block:: python

    # this will raise an exception if run after the previous code block
    pipette.pick_up_tip()

To change the location of the first tip used by the pipette, you can use :py:attr:`.InstrumentContext.starting_tip`:

.. code-block:: python
    pipette.starting_tip = tip_rack_1.well('C3')
    pipette.pick_up_tip()  # pick up C3 from "tip_rack_1"
    pipette.return_tip()

To reset the tip tracking, you can call :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.reset_tipracks`:

.. code-block:: python

    # Use up all tips
    for _ in range(96+96):
         pipette.pick_up_tip()
         pipette.return_tip()

    # Reset the tip tracker
    pipette.reset_tipracks()

    # Picks up a tip from well A1 of the first tip rack
    pipette.pick_up_tip()


.. versionadded:: 2.0

**********************

****************
Liquid Control
****************

This section describes the :py:class:`.InstrumentContext` 's liquid-handling commands.

The examples in this section should be inserted in the following:

.. code-block:: python

    metadata = {'apiLevel': '2.0'}

    def run(protocol):
        tiprack = protocol.load_labware('corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat', 2)
        plate = protocol.load_labware('opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul', 3)
        pipette = protocol.load_instrument('p300_single_gen2', mount='left', tip_racks=[tiprack])
        pipette.pick_up_tip()
        # example code goes here


This loads a `Corning 96 Well Plate <https://labware.opentrons.com/corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat>`_ in slot 2 and a `Opentrons 300ul Tiprack <https://labware.opentrons.com/opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul>`_ in slot 3, and uses a P300 Single GEN2 pipette.


.. _new-aspirate:

Aspirate
========

To aspirate is to pull liquid up into the pipette's tip. When calling :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.aspirate` on a pipette, you can specify the volume to aspirate in µL, where to aspirate from, and how fast to aspirate liquid.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.aspirate(50, plate['A1'], rate=2.0)  # aspirate 50uL from plate:A1

Now the pipette's tip is holding 50 µL.

The ``location`` parameter is either a well (like ``plate['A1']``) or a position within a well, like the return value of ``plate['A1'].bottom``.

The ``rate`` parameter is a multiplication factor of the pipette's default aspiration flow rate. The default aspiration flow rate for all pipettes is in the :ref:`defaults` section.

You can also simply specify the volume to aspirate, and not mention a location. The pipette will aspirate from its current location (which we previously set as ``plate['A1'])``.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.aspirate(50)                     # aspirate 50uL from current position

Now our pipette's tip is holding 100 µL.

.. note::

    In version 1 of this API, ``aspirate`` (and ``dispense``) would inspect the types of the ``volume`` and ``location`` arguments and do the right thing if you specified only a location or specified location and volume out of order. In this and future versions of the Python Protocol API, this is no longer true. Like any other Python function, if you are specifying arguments by position without using their names, you must always specify them in order.

.. note::

    By default, the OT-2 will move to 1mm above the bottom of the target well before aspirating.
    You can change this by using a well position function like :py:meth:`.Well.bottom` (see
    :ref:`v2-location-within-wells`) every time you call ``aspirate``, or - if you want to change
    the default throughout your protocol - you can change the default offset with
    :py:attr:`.InstrumentContext.well_bottom_clearance` (see :ref:`new-default-op-positions`).

.. versionadded:: 2.0

.. _new-dispense:

Dispense
========

To dispense is to push out liquid from the pipette's tip. The usage of :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.dispense` in the Protocol API is similar to :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.aspirate`, in that you can specify volume in µL and location, or only volume.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.dispense(50, plate['B1'], rate=2.0) # dispense 50uL to plate:B1 at twice the normal rate
    pipette.dispense(50)              # dispense 50uL to current position at the normal rate


The ``location`` parameter is either a well (like ``plate['A1']``) or a position within a well, like the return value of ``plate['A1'].bottom``.

The ``rate`` parameter is a multiplication factor of the pipette's default dispense flow rate. The default dispense flow rate for all pipettes is in the :ref:`defaults` section.

.. note::

    By default, the OT-2 will move to 1mm above the bottom of the target well before dispensing.
    You can change this by using a well position function like :py:meth:`.Well.bottom` (see
    :ref:`v2-location-within-wells`) every time you call ``dispense``, or - if you want to change
    the default throughout your protocol - you can change the default offset with
    :py:attr:`.InstrumentContext.well_bottom_clearance` (see :ref:`new-default-op-positions`).

.. note::

    In version 1 of this API, ``dispense`` (and ``aspirate``) would inspect the types of the ``volume`` and ``location`` arguments and do the right thing if you specified only a location or specified location and volume out of order. In this and future versions of the Python Protocol API, this is no longer true. Like any other Python function, if you are specifying arguments by position without using their names, you must always specify them in order.

.. versionadded:: 2.0

.. _new-blow-out:

.. _blow-out:

Blow Out
========

To blow out is to push an extra amount of air through the pipette's tip, to make sure that any remaining droplets are expelled.

When calling :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.blow_out`, you can specify a location to blow out the remaining liquid. If no location is specified, the pipette will blow out from its current position.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.blow_out()            # blow out in current location
    pipette.blow_out(plate['B3']) # blow out in current plate:B3


.. versionadded:: 2.0

.. _touch-tip:

Touch Tip
=========

To touch tip is to move the pipette's currently attached tip to four opposite edges of a well, to knock off any droplets that might be hanging from the tip.

When calling :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.touch_tip` on a pipette, you have the option to specify a location where the tip will touch the inner walls.

:py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.touch_tip` can take up to 4 arguments: ``touch_tip(location, radius, v_offset, speed)``.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.touch_tip()            # touch tip within current location
    pipette.touch_tip(v_offset=-2) # touch tip 2mm below the top of the current location
    pipette.touch_tip(plate['B1']) # touch tip within plate:B1
    pipette.touch_tip(plate['B1'], speed=100) # touch tip within plate:B1 at 100 mm/s
    pipette.touch_tip(plate['B1'], # touch tip in plate:B1, at 75% of total radius and -2mm from top of well
                      radius=0.75,
                      v_offset=-2)


.. versionadded:: 2.0

.. _mix:

Mix
===

To mix is to perform a series of ``aspirate`` and ``dispense`` commands in a row on a single location. Instead of having to write those commands out every time, you can call :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.mix`.

The ``mix`` command takes up to three arguments: ``mix(repetitions, volume, location)``:

.. code-block:: python

    # mix 4 times, 100uL, in plate:A2
    pipette.mix(4, 100, plate.['A2'])
    # mix 3 times, 50uL, in current location
    pipette.mix(3, 50)
    # mix 2 times, pipette's max volume, in current location
    pipette.mix(2)

.. note::

    Mixes consist of aspirates and then immediate dispenses. In between these actions, the pipette moves up and out of the target well. This is normal, and is done to avoid incorrect aspirate and dispense actions.


.. versionadded:: 2.0

.. _air-gap:

Air Gap
=======

When dealing with certain liquids, you may need to aspirate air after aspirating the liquid to prevent it from sliding out of the pipette's tip. A call to :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.air_gap` with a volume in µL will aspirate that much air into the tip. ``air_gap`` takes up to two arguments: ``air_gap(volume, height)``:

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.aspirate(100, plate['B4'])
    pipette.air_gap(20)
    pipette.drop_tip()

.. versionadded:: 2.0

**********************

****************
Utility Commands
****************

Move To
=======

You can use :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.move_to` to move a pipette to any location on the deck.

For example, you can move to the first tip in your tip rack:

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.move_to(tiprack['A1'].top())


Unlike commands that require labware, like :ref:`new-aspirate` or :ref:`new-dispense`, :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.move_to` deals with :py:class:`.types.Location` instances, which combine positions in :ref:`protocol-api-deck-coords` and associated :py:class:`.Labware` instances. You don't have to create them yourself; this is what is returned from methods such as :py:meth:`.Well.top` and :py:meth:`.Well.bottom`. It does mean, however, that you can't move to a well directly; you must use :py:meth:`.Well.top` or build a :py:class:`.types.Location` yourself.

You can also specify at what height you would like the robot to move to inside of a location using :py:meth:`.Well.top` and :py:meth:`.Well.bottom` methods on that location (more on these methods and others like them in the :ref:`v2-location-within-wells` section):

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.move_to(plate['A1'].bottom())  # move to the bottom of well A1
    pipette.move_to(plate['A1'].top())     # move to the top of well A1
    pipette.move_to(plate['A1'].bottom(2)) # move to 2mm above the bottom of well A1
    pipette.move_to(plate['A1'].top(-2))   # move to 2mm below the top of well A1

The above commands will cause the robot's head to first move upwards, then over to above the target location, then finally downwards until the target location is reached.
If instead you would like the robot to move in a straight line to the target location, you can set the movement strategy to ``'direct'``.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.move_to(plate['A1'].top(), force_direct=True)

.. warning::

    Moving without an arc will run the risk of colliding with things on your deck. Be very careful when using this option.

Usually the above option is useful when moving inside of a well. Take a look at the below sequence of movements, which first move the head to a well, and use 'direct' movements inside that well, then finally move on to a different well.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.move_to(plate['A1'].top())
    pipette.move_to(plate['A1'].bottom(1), force_direct=True)
    pipette.move_to(plate['A1'].top(-2), force_direct=True)
    pipette.move_to(plate['A2'].top())

.. versionadded:: 2.0


Delay
=====

Sometimes you need to pause your protocol, for instance to wait for something to incubate. You can use :py:meth:`.ProtocolContext.delay` to pause your protocol for a specific amount of time. ``delay`` is a method of :py:class:`.ProtocolContext` since it concerns the protocol and the OT-2 as a whole.

The value passed into ``delay()`` is the number of minutes or seconds the OT-2 will wait until moving on to the next command.

.. code-block:: python

    protocol.delay(seconds=2)             # pause for 2 seconds
    protocol.delay(minutes=5)             # pause for 5 minutes
    protocol.delay(minutes=5, seconds=2)  # pause for 5 minutes and 2 seconds

User-Specified Pause
====================

The method :py:meth:`.ProtocolContext.pause` will pause protocol execution at a specific step.
You can resume by pressing 'resume' in your Opentrons App. You can optionally specify a message that
will be displayed in the Opentrons App when protocol execution pauses.

.. code-block:: python

    from opentrons import protocol_api

    metadata = {'apiLevel': '2.0'}

    def run(protocol: protocol_api.ProtocolContext):
        # The start of your protocol goes here...

        # The OT-2 stops here until you press resume. It will display the message in
        # the Opentrons App. You do not need to specify a message, but it makes things
        # more clear.
        protocol.pause('Time to take a break')

.. versionadded:: 2.0

Homing
======

You can manually request that the OT-2 home during protocol execution. This is typically
not necessary; however, if at any point you will disengage motors or move
the gantry with your hand, you may want to command a home afterwards.

To home the entire OT-2, you can call :py:meth:`.ProtocolContext.home`.

To home a specific pipette's Z axis and plunger, you can call :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.home`.

To home a specific pipette's plunger only, you can call :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.home_plunger`.

None of these functions take any arguments:

.. code-block:: python

    from opentrons import protocol_api, types

    metadata = {'apiLevel': '2.0'}

    def run(protocol: protocol_api.ProtocolContext):
        pipette = protocol.load_instrument('p300_single', 'right')
        protocol.home() # Homes the gantry, z axes, and plungers
        pipette.home()  # Homes the right z axis and plunger
        pipette.home_plunger() # Homes the right plunger

.. versionadded:: 2.0


Comment
=======

The method :py:meth:`.ProtocolContext.comment` lets you display messages in the Opentrons App during protocol execution:


.. code-block:: python

    from opentrons import protocol_api, types

    metadata = {'apiLevel': '2.0'}

    def run(protocol: protocol_api.ProtocolContext):
        protocol.comment('Hello, world!')

.. versionadded:: 2.0

Commit message:

fix(api): do not pick up returned tips (#4681)
* fix(api): do not pick up returned tips

closes #4668

* bump api version and update docs

* add return tip test for old version

* make requested changes

api/docs/v2/new_atomic_commands.rst, after:

.. _v2-atomic-commands:

#######################
Building Block Commands
#######################

Building block, or basic, commands are the smallest individual actions that can be completed on an OT-2.
For example, the complex command ``transfer`` (see :ref:`v2-complex-commands`) executes a series of ``pick_up_tip()``, ``aspirate()``, ``dispense()`` and ``drop_tip()`` basic commands.

The examples in this section would be added to the following:

.. code-block:: python

    from opentrons import protocol_api

    metadata = {'apiLevel': '2.0'}

    def run(protocol: protocol_api.ProtocolContext):
        tiprack = protocol.load_labware('corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat', 2)
        plate = protocol.load_labware('opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul', 3)
        pipette = protocol.load_instrument('p300_single_gen2', mount='left')
        # the example code below would go here, inside the run function


This loads a `Corning 96 Well Plate <https://labware.opentrons.com/corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat>`_ in slot 2 and a `Opentrons 300 µL Tiprack <https://labware.opentrons.com/opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul>`_ in slot 3, and uses a P300 Single GEN2 pipette.


**************
Tip Handling
**************

When the OT-2 handle liquids with, it constantly exchanges old, used tips for new ones to prevent cross-contamination between wells. Tip handling uses the functions :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.pick_up_tip`, :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.drop_tip`, and :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.return_tip`.

Pick Up Tip
===========

Before any liquid handling can be done, your pipette must have a tip on it. The command :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.pick_up_tip` will move the pipette over to the specified tip, then press down into it to create a vacuum seal. The below example picks up the tip at location ``'A1'`` of the tiprack previously loaded in slot 3.

.. code-block:: python

   pipette.pick_up_tip(tiprack['A1'])

If you have associated a tiprack with your pipette such as in the :ref:`new-pipette` or :ref:`protocol_api-protocols-and-instruments` sections, then you can simply call

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.pick_up_tip()

This will use the next available tip from the list of tipracks passed in to the ``tip_racks`` argument of :py:meth:`.ProtocolContext.load_instrument`.               

.. versionadded:: 2.0

Drop Tip
========

Once finished with a tip, the pipette will remove the tip when we call :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.drop_tip`. You can specify where to drop the tip by passing in a location. The below example drops the tip back at its original location on the tip rack.
If no location is specified, the OT-2 will drop the tip in the fixed trash in slot 12 of the deck.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.pick_up_tip()
    pipette.drop_tip(tiprack['A1'])  # drop back in A1 of the tiprack
    pipette.pick_up_tip()
    pipette.drop_tip()  # drop in the fixed trash on the deck


.. versionadded:: 2.0

Return Tip
===========

To retun the tip to the original location, you can call :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.return_tip`. The example below will automatically return the tip to ``'A3'`` on the tip rack.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.pick_up_tip(tiprack['A3'])
    pipette.return_tip()

.. note:

    In API Version 2.0 and 2.1, the returned tips are added back into the tip-tracker and thus treated as `unused`. If you make a subsequent call to `pick_up_tip` then the software will treat returned tips as valid locations.
    In API Version 2.2, returned tips are no longer added back into the tip tracker. This means that returned tips are no longer valid locations and the pipette will not attempt to pick up tips from these locations. 

In API version 2.2 or above:

.. code-block:: python

    tip_rack = protocol.load_labware(
            'opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul', 1)
    pipette = protocol.load_instrument(
        'p300_single_gen2', mount='left', tip_racks=[tip_rack])

    pipette.pick_up_tip() # picks up tip_rack:A1
    pipette.return_tip()
    pipette.pick_up_tip() # picks up tip_rack:B1

In API version 2.0 and 2.1:

.. code-block:: python

    tip_rack = protocol.load_labware(
            'opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul', 1)
    pipette = protocol.load_instrument(
        'p300_single_gen2', mount='left', tip_racks=[tip_rack])

    pipette.pick_up_tip() # picks up tip_rack:A1
    pipette.return_tip()
    pipette.pick_up_tip() # picks up tip_rack:A1

Iterating Through Tips
----------------------

For this section, instead of using the protocol defined above, consider this setup:

.. code-block:: python

    from opentrons import protocol_api

    metadata = {'apiLevel': '2.0'}

    def run(protocol: protocol_api.ProtocolContext):
        plate = protocol.load_labware(
            'corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat', 2)
        tip_rack_1 = protocol.load_labware(
            'opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul', 3)
        tip_rack_2 = protocol.load_labware(
            'opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul', 4)
        pipette = protocol.load_instrument(
            'p300_single_gen2', mount='left', tip_racks=[tip_rack_1, tip_rack_2])

This loads a `Corning 96 Well Plate <https://labware.opentrons.com/corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat>`_ in slot 2 and two `Opentrons 300ul Tiprack <https://labware.opentrons.com/opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul>`_ in slots 3 and 4 respectively, and uses a P300 Single GEN2 pipette.

When a list of tip racks is associated with a pipette in its ``tip_racks`` argument, the pipette will automatically pick up the next unused tip in the list whenever you call :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.pick_up_tip`. The pipette will first use all tips in the first tiprack, then move on to the second, and so on:

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.pick_up_tip()  # picks up tip_rack_1:A1
    pipette.return_tip()
    pipette.pick_up_tip()  # picks up tip_rack_1:A2
    pipette.drop_tip()     # automatically drops in trash

    # use loop to pick up tips tip_rack_1:A3 through tip_rack_2:H12
    tips_left = 94 + 96 # add up the number of tips leftover in both tipracks
    for _ in range(tips_left):
        pipette.pick_up_tip()
        pipette.return_tip()

If you try to :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.pick_up_tip()` again when all the tips have been used, the Protocol API will show you an error:

.. code-block:: python

    # this will raise an exception if run after the previous code block
    pipette.pick_up_tip()

To change the location of the first tip used by the pipette, you can use :py:attr:`.InstrumentContext.starting_tip`:

.. code-block:: python
    pipette.starting_tip = tip_rack_1.well('C3')
    pipette.pick_up_tip()  # pick up C3 from "tip_rack_1"
    pipette.return_tip()

To reset the tip tracking, you can call :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.reset_tipracks`:

.. code-block:: python

    # Use up all tips
    for _ in range(96+96):
         pipette.pick_up_tip()
         pipette.return_tip()

    # Reset the tip tracker
    pipette.reset_tipracks()

    # Picks up a tip from well A1 of the first tip rack
    pipette.pick_up_tip()


.. versionadded:: 2.0

**********************

****************
Liquid Control
****************

This section describes the :py:class:`.InstrumentContext` 's liquid-handling commands.

The examples in this section should be inserted in the following:

.. code-block:: python

    metadata = {'apiLevel': '2.0'}

    def run(protocol):
        tiprack = protocol.load_labware('corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat', 2)
        plate = protocol.load_labware('opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul', 3)
        pipette = protocol.load_instrument('p300_single_gen2', mount='left', tip_racks=[tiprack])
        pipette.pick_up_tip()
        # example code goes here


This loads a `Corning 96 Well Plate <https://labware.opentrons.com/corning_96_wellplate_360ul_flat>`_ in slot 2 and a `Opentrons 300ul Tiprack <https://labware.opentrons.com/opentrons_96_tiprack_300ul>`_ in slot 3, and uses a P300 Single GEN2 pipette.


.. _new-aspirate:

Aspirate
========

To aspirate is to pull liquid up into the pipette's tip. When calling :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.aspirate` on a pipette, you can specify the volume to aspirate in µL, where to aspirate from, and how fast to aspirate liquid.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.aspirate(50, plate['A1'], rate=2.0)  # aspirate 50uL from plate:A1

Now the pipette's tip is holding 50 µL.

The ``location`` parameter is either a well (like ``plate['A1']``) or a position within a well, like the return value of ``plate['A1'].bottom``.

The ``rate`` parameter is a multiplication factor of the pipette's default aspiration flow rate. The default aspiration flow rate for all pipettes is in the :ref:`defaults` section.

You can also simply specify the volume to aspirate, and not mention a location. The pipette will aspirate from its current location (which we previously set as ``plate['A1'])``.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.aspirate(50)                     # aspirate 50uL from current position

Now our pipette's tip is holding 100 µL.

.. note::

    In version 1 of this API, ``aspirate`` (and ``dispense``) would inspect the types of the ``volume`` and ``location`` arguments and do the right thing if you specified only a location or specified location and volume out of order. In this and future versions of the Python Protocol API, this is no longer true. Like any other Python function, if you are specifying arguments by position without using their names, you must always specify them in order.

.. note::

    By default, the OT-2 will move to 1mm above the bottom of the target well before aspirating.
    You can change this by using a well position function like :py:meth:`.Well.bottom` (see
    :ref:`v2-location-within-wells`) every time you call ``aspirate``, or - if you want to change
    the default throughout your protocol - you can change the default offset with
    :py:attr:`.InstrumentContext.well_bottom_clearance` (see :ref:`new-default-op-positions`).

.. versionadded:: 2.0

.. _new-dispense:

Dispense
========

To dispense is to push out liquid from the pipette's tip. The usage of :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.dispense` in the Protocol API is similar to :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.aspirate`, in that you can specify volume in µL and location, or only volume.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.dispense(50, plate['B1'], rate=2.0) # dispense 50uL to plate:B1 at twice the normal rate
    pipette.dispense(50)              # dispense 50uL to current position at the normal rate


The ``location`` parameter is either a well (like ``plate['A1']``) or a position within a well, like the return value of ``plate['A1'].bottom``.

The ``rate`` parameter is a multiplication factor of the pipette's default dispense flow rate. The default dispense flow rate for all pipettes is in the :ref:`defaults` section.

.. note::

    By default, the OT-2 will move to 1mm above the bottom of the target well before dispensing.
    You can change this by using a well position function like :py:meth:`.Well.bottom` (see
    :ref:`v2-location-within-wells`) every time you call ``dispense``, or - if you want to change
    the default throughout your protocol - you can change the default offset with
    :py:attr:`.InstrumentContext.well_bottom_clearance` (see :ref:`new-default-op-positions`).

.. note::

    In version 1 of this API, ``dispense`` (and ``aspirate``) would inspect the types of the ``volume`` and ``location`` arguments and do the right thing if you specified only a location or specified location and volume out of order. In this and future versions of the Python Protocol API, this is no longer true. Like any other Python function, if you are specifying arguments by position without using their names, you must always specify them in order.

.. versionadded:: 2.0

.. _new-blow-out:

.. _blow-out:

Blow Out
========

To blow out is to push an extra amount of air through the pipette's tip, to make sure that any remaining droplets are expelled.

When calling :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.blow_out`, you can specify a location to blow out the remaining liquid. If no location is specified, the pipette will blow out from its current position.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.blow_out()            # blow out in current location
    pipette.blow_out(plate['B3']) # blow out in current plate:B3


.. versionadded:: 2.0

.. _touch-tip:

Touch Tip
=========

To touch tip is to move the pipette's currently attached tip to four opposite edges of a well, to knock off any droplets that might be hanging from the tip.

When calling :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.touch_tip` on a pipette, you have the option to specify a location where the tip will touch the inner walls.

:py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.touch_tip` can take up to 4 arguments: ``touch_tip(location, radius, v_offset, speed)``.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.touch_tip()            # touch tip within current location
    pipette.touch_tip(v_offset=-2) # touch tip 2mm below the top of the current location
    pipette.touch_tip(plate['B1']) # touch tip within plate:B1
    pipette.touch_tip(plate['B1'], speed=100) # touch tip within plate:B1 at 100 mm/s
    pipette.touch_tip(plate['B1'], # touch tip in plate:B1, at 75% of total radius and -2mm from top of well
                      radius=0.75,
                      v_offset=-2)


.. versionadded:: 2.0

.. _mix:

Mix
===

To mix is to perform a series of ``aspirate`` and ``dispense`` commands in a row on a single location. Instead of having to write those commands out every time, you can call :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.mix`.

The ``mix`` command takes up to three arguments: ``mix(repetitions, volume, location)``:

.. code-block:: python

    # mix 4 times, 100uL, in plate:A2
    pipette.mix(4, 100, plate.['A2'])
    # mix 3 times, 50uL, in current location
    pipette.mix(3, 50)
    # mix 2 times, pipette's max volume, in current location
    pipette.mix(2)

.. note::

    Mixes consist of aspirates and then immediate dispenses. In between these actions, the pipette moves up and out of the target well. This is normal, and is done to avoid incorrect aspirate and dispense actions.


.. versionadded:: 2.0

.. _air-gap:

Air Gap
=======

When dealing with certain liquids, you may need to aspirate air after aspirating the liquid to prevent it from sliding out of the pipette's tip. A call to :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.air_gap` with a volume in µL will aspirate that much air into the tip. ``air_gap`` takes up to two arguments: ``air_gap(volume, height)``:

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.aspirate(100, plate['B4'])
    pipette.air_gap(20)
    pipette.drop_tip()

.. versionadded:: 2.0

**********************

****************
Utility Commands
****************

Move To
=======

You can use :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.move_to` to move a pipette to any location on the deck.

For example, you can move to the first tip in your tip rack:

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.move_to(tiprack['A1'].top())


Unlike commands that require labware, like :ref:`new-aspirate` or :ref:`new-dispense`, :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.move_to` deals with :py:class:`.types.Location` instances, which combine positions in :ref:`protocol-api-deck-coords` and associated :py:class:`.Labware` instances. You don't have to create them yourself; this is what is returned from methods such as :py:meth:`.Well.top` and :py:meth:`.Well.bottom`. It does mean, however, that you can't move to a well directly; you must use :py:meth:`.Well.top` or build a :py:class:`.types.Location` yourself.

You can also specify at what height you would like the robot to move to inside of a location using :py:meth:`.Well.top` and :py:meth:`.Well.bottom` methods on that location (more on these methods and others like them in the :ref:`v2-location-within-wells` section):

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.move_to(plate['A1'].bottom())  # move to the bottom of well A1
    pipette.move_to(plate['A1'].top())     # move to the top of well A1
    pipette.move_to(plate['A1'].bottom(2)) # move to 2mm above the bottom of well A1
    pipette.move_to(plate['A1'].top(-2))   # move to 2mm below the top of well A1

The above commands will cause the robot's head to first move upwards, then over to above the target location, then finally downwards until the target location is reached.
If instead you would like the robot to move in a straight line to the target location, you can set the movement strategy to ``'direct'``.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.move_to(plate['A1'].top(), force_direct=True)

.. warning::

    Moving without an arc will run the risk of colliding with things on your deck. Be very careful when using this option.

Usually the above option is useful when moving inside of a well. Take a look at the below sequence of movements, which first move the head to a well, and use 'direct' movements inside that well, then finally move on to a different well.

.. code-block:: python

    pipette.move_to(plate['A1'].top())
    pipette.move_to(plate['A1'].bottom(1), force_direct=True)
    pipette.move_to(plate['A1'].top(-2), force_direct=True)
    pipette.move_to(plate['A2'].top())

.. versionadded:: 2.0


Delay
=====

Sometimes you need to pause your protocol, for instance to wait for something to incubate. You can use :py:meth:`.ProtocolContext.delay` to pause your protocol for a specific amount of time. ``delay`` is a method of :py:class:`.ProtocolContext` since it concerns the protocol and the OT-2 as a whole.

The value passed into ``delay()`` is the number of minutes or seconds the OT-2 will wait until moving on to the next command.

.. code-block:: python

    protocol.delay(seconds=2)             # pause for 2 seconds
    protocol.delay(minutes=5)             # pause for 5 minutes
    protocol.delay(minutes=5, seconds=2)  # pause for 5 minutes and 2 seconds

User-Specified Pause
====================

The method :py:meth:`.ProtocolContext.pause` will pause protocol execution at a specific step.
You can resume by pressing 'resume' in your Opentrons App. You can optionally specify a message that
will be displayed in the Opentrons App when protocol execution pauses.

.. code-block:: python

    from opentrons import protocol_api

    metadata = {'apiLevel': '2.0'}

    def run(protocol: protocol_api.ProtocolContext):
        # The start of your protocol goes here...

        # The OT-2 stops here until you press resume. It will display the message in
        # the Opentrons App. You do not need to specify a message, but it makes things
        # more clear.
        protocol.pause('Time to take a break')

.. versionadded:: 2.0

Homing
======

You can manually request that the OT-2 home during protocol execution. This is typically
not necessary; however, if at any point you will disengage motors or move
the gantry with your hand, you may want to command a home afterwards.

To home the entire OT-2, you can call :py:meth:`.ProtocolContext.home`.

To home a specific pipette's Z axis and plunger, you can call :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.home`.

To home a specific pipette's plunger only, you can call :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.home_plunger`.

None of these functions take any arguments:

.. code-block:: python

    from opentrons import protocol_api, types

    metadata = {'apiLevel': '2.0'}

    def run(protocol: protocol_api.ProtocolContext):
        pipette = protocol.load_instrument('p300_single', 'right')
        protocol.home() # Homes the gantry, z axes, and plungers
        pipette.home()  # Homes the right z axis and plunger
        pipette.home_plunger() # Homes the right plunger

.. versionadded:: 2.0


Comment
=======

The method :py:meth:`.ProtocolContext.comment` lets you display messages in the Opentrons App during protocol execution:


.. code-block:: python

    from opentrons import protocol_api, types

    metadata = {'apiLevel': '2.0'}

    def run(protocol: protocol_api.ProtocolContext):
        protocol.comment('Hello, world!')

.. versionadded:: 2.0
