api/docs/v2/pipettes/configuring.rst, before:

.. _configuring-pipette-modes:

*************************
Configuring Pipette Modes
*************************

TK configuring intro

Partial Tip Pickup
==================

TKTKTK

.. _pipette-volume-modes:

Volume Modes
============

The Flex 1-Channel 50 µL and Flex 8-Channel 50 µL pipettes must operate in a low-volume mode to accurately dispense very small volumes of liquid. Set the volume mode by calling :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.configure_for_volume` with the amount of liquid you plan to aspirate, in µL::

    pipette50.configure_for_volume(1)
    pipette50.pick_up_tip()
    pipette50.aspirate(1, plate["A1"])
    
.. versionadded:: 2.15

Passing different values to ``configure_for_volume()`` changes the minimum and maximum volume of Flex 50 µL pipettes as follows:

.. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1
    :widths: 2 3 3
    
    * - Value
      - Minimum Volume (µL)
      - Maximum Volume (µL)
    * - 1–4.9
      - 1
      - 30
    * - 5–50
      - 5
      - 50

.. note::
    The pipette must not contain liquid when you call ``configure_for_volume()``, or the API will raise an error.
    
    Also, if the pipette is in a well location that may contain liquid, it will move upward to ensure it is not immersed in liquid before changing its mode. Calling ``configure_for_volume()`` *before* ``pick_up_tip()`` helps to avoid this situation.

In a protocol that handles many different volumes, it's a good practice to call ``configure_for_volume()`` once for each :py:meth:`.transfer` or :py:meth:`.aspirate`, specifying the volume that you are about to handle. When operating with a list of volumes, nest ``configure_for_volume()`` inside a ``for`` loop to ensure that the pipette is properly configured for each volume:

.. code-block:: python
    
    volumes = [1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 5, 2, 8]
    sources = plate.columns()[0]
    destinations = plate.columns()[1]
    for i in range(8):
        pipette50.configure_for_volume(volumes[i])
        pipette50.pick_up_tip()
        pipette50.aspirate(volume=volumes[i], location=sources[i])
        pipette50.dispense(location=destinations[i])
        pipette50.drop_tip()

If you know that all your liquid handling will take place in a specific mode, then you can call ``configure_for_volume()`` just once with a representative volume. Or if all the volumes correspond to the pipette's default mode, you don't have to call ``configure_for_volume()`` at all.

Commit message:

Configuring intro + first bit of partial pickup

api/docs/v2/pipettes/configuring.rst, after:

.. _configuring-pipette-modes:

*************************
Configuring Pipette Modes
*************************

The API provides methods to configure certain pipettes to operate in a specific mode. These configuration methods change the default behavior of the pipette on an ongoing basis, until you call them again with different values. 

This page covers the currently available modes.

- :ref:`partial-tip-pickup`: The 96-channel pipette can be configured to use 8 or 96 nozzles for pipetting.
- :ref:`pipette-volume-modes`: The Flex 50 µL pipettes can be configured to handle liquid differently for low or high volumes.

There are no mode configurations for OT-2 pipettes.


.. _partial-tip-pickup:

Partial Tip Pickup
==================

The 96-channel pipette occupies both pipette mounts on Flex, so it's not possible to attach another pipette at the same time. Partial tip pickup lets you perform some of the same actions that you would be able to perform with a second pipette. As of version 2.16 of the API, you can configure the 96-channel pipette pick up a single column of tips, similar to the behavior of an 8-channel pipette.

Nozzle Layout
-------------

Use the :py:meth:`.configure_nozzle_layout` method to choose how many tips the 96-channel pipette will pick up


Tip Rack Adapters
-----------------


Tip Pickup and Return Behavior
------------------------------

.. _pipette-volume-modes:

Volume Modes
============

The Flex 1-Channel 50 µL and Flex 8-Channel 50 µL pipettes must operate in a low-volume mode to accurately dispense very small volumes of liquid. Set the volume mode by calling :py:meth:`.InstrumentContext.configure_for_volume` with the amount of liquid you plan to aspirate, in µL::

    pipette50.configure_for_volume(1)
    pipette50.pick_up_tip()
    pipette50.aspirate(1, plate["A1"])
    
.. versionadded:: 2.15

Passing different values to ``configure_for_volume()`` changes the minimum and maximum volume of Flex 50 µL pipettes as follows:

.. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1
    :widths: 2 3 3
    
    * - Value
      - Minimum Volume (µL)
      - Maximum Volume (µL)
    * - 1–4.9
      - 1
      - 30
    * - 5–50
      - 5
      - 50

.. note::
    The pipette must not contain liquid when you call ``configure_for_volume()``, or the API will raise an error.
    
    Also, if the pipette is in a well location that may contain liquid, it will move upward to ensure it is not immersed in liquid before changing its mode. Calling ``configure_for_volume()`` *before* ``pick_up_tip()`` helps to avoid this situation.

In a protocol that handles many different volumes, it's a good practice to call ``configure_for_volume()`` once for each :py:meth:`.transfer` or :py:meth:`.aspirate`, specifying the volume that you are about to handle. When operating with a list of volumes, nest ``configure_for_volume()`` inside a ``for`` loop to ensure that the pipette is properly configured for each volume:

.. code-block:: python
    
    volumes = [1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 5, 2, 8]
    sources = plate.columns()[0]
    destinations = plate.columns()[1]
    for i in range(8):
        pipette50.configure_for_volume(volumes[i])
        pipette50.pick_up_tip()
        pipette50.aspirate(volume=volumes[i], location=sources[i])
        pipette50.dispense(location=destinations[i])
        pipette50.drop_tip()

If you know that all your liquid handling will take place in a specific mode, then you can call ``configure_for_volume()`` just once with a representative volume. Or if all the volumes correspond to the pipette's default mode, you don't have to call ``configure_for_volume()`` at all.
